`HDS Docs` - Breakpoints (#2855)
hashicorp/design-system: website/docs/foundations/breakpoints/partials/guidelines/guidelines.md

## Breakpoints

Breakpoints define specific viewport widths where the layout adjusts to support responsive experiences across screen sizes and devices.

These values are then used to create utilities and helper components to standardize changes of the UI at different viewport sizes.

### The ranges

Helios defines five breakpoints: `sm`, `md`, `lg`, `xl`, and `xxl`.

| Name   | Value        | Application                   |
| ------ | ------------ | ----------------------------- |

> | sm     | 480px        | 480 → 767                     |

Reviewer: Have you looked at the PR for the code implementation? https://github.com/hashicorp/design-system/pull/2848
In that case, as a consumer, wouldn't you expect to use `xs` also in the mixins? And given that it doesn't work, wouldn't it be confusing (or probably you would think it's broken), no?

> | sm     | 480px        | 480 → 767                     |

Reviewer 2: Yeah I saw the code implementation, and I don't think it makes sense to add a fake value there. This was just more a question of how would we refer to values less than 480, and adding the "xs" as a solution to that. 

I was looking at [Bootstrap](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/5.3/layout/breakpoints/#available-breakpoints), which does have an xs value that is set to 0 and basically doesn't do anything. They probably only have it so people can customize it, which isn't needed in our case.

> | sm     | 480px        | 480 → 767                     |

Author: We don't have an XS breakpoint though. The way it is being built is that they would use a SASS function that would be similar to `breakpoint-down('sm')` which would effectively be what you're describing.

> | sm     | 480px        | 480 → 767                     |

Reviewer 3: @dchyun Just wanted to comment, I find it a bit confusing too to not include values below 480px in the smallest view. However, I suppose as we start to use these in practice, we'll see if it's actually a problem or not and then could rethink if needed. (Just the view I'm taking currently.)

> | sm     | 480px        | 480 → 767                     |

Reviewer 2: I agree with your approach Kristin. My comment was more just around having a way of referring to those values. But we can see how things play out.

| md     | 768px        | 768 → 1087                    |
| lg     | 1088px       | 1088 → 1439                   |
| xl     | 1440px       | 1440 → 1919                   |
| xxl    | 1920px       | 1920 and up                   |

> The breakpoint name refers to a range of pixel values, not just the starting value. For example, the `sm` breakpoint refers to widths between 480px and 767px. This helps simplify the language around what these ranges mean when designing and increases the flexibility in implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The breakpoint name refers to a range of pixel values, not just the starting value. For example, the `sm` breakpoint refers to widths between 480px and 767px. This helps simplify the language around what these ranges mean when designing and increases the flexibility in implementation.

_Note: the range 0-479px is intentionally left without a name: from a design perspective, we don't expect designers to produce mockups for such small screen sizes; from a development perspective, in a mobile-first approach that range can be covered using default styles (overwritten via media queries for subsequent ranges)._
```

Reviewer 4: Should this go in a banner?

> ### Working with custom values

Reviewer: What about simplifying the title to "Custom values" or "Custom breakpoints"?

Reviewer 4: +1 to "Custom breakpoints"

Author: I like "Custom values," ill adjust!

> The provided breakpoints serve as a cohesive _starting_ point for design. However, custom values may be necessary for specific use cases that these breakpoints do not cover. For example, if a team discovers that users with 2500px viewports are using a product, a nuanced approach to the UI at that screen size may be required. In such cases, an additional value can be added to enhance the user experience.

Reviewer: > if a team discovers that users with 2500px viewports are using a product, a nuanced approach to the UI at that screen size may be required

@majedelass well, it's **very** likely that such user will exist, the analytics already tell us this :)
Probably what we want to suggest to the designers is to consider the layout of the UI they're working on, and if they have a sense that at low viewport sizes may not work or may require reorganization of the content to fit the screen width, then they should use the different templates offered in our Figma UI Kit/Library (there's no mention of it, in the whole documentation page, probably an oversight?) to provide mocks at different viewport widths for the engineers.

Author: We don't often link it in the docs because not everyone reading the docs has access to the templates themselves (consider folks who are external to the org).

Author: Adding the link.

> !!! info
> 
> If a custom value already exists that is relatively close to an established breakpoint, it is recommended that it be migrated to the nearest standard breakpoint. This creates a consistent and predictable experience for the user as they work within (and across) the HashiCorp product suite.
> 
> !!!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! Insight

If a custom value already exists that is relatively close to an established breakpoint, we recommend to migrate it to the nearest standard breakpoint. This creates a consistent and predictable experience for the user as they work within (and across) the HashiCorp product suite.

!!!
```

Reviewer 4: I might use "…we recommend migrating it to the nearest standard breakpoint."

Author: How about:
```suggestion
!!! info

If a custom value already exists that is relatively close to an established breakpoint, we recommend migrating it to the nearest standard breakpoint. This creates a consistent and predictable experience for the user as they work within (and across) the HashiCorp product suite.

!!!
```

> ## Designing with purpose

Reviewer 2: [Suggestion] We leave a lot of the interpretation of when to use the breakpoints up to the designers, but it could be helpful if we offer general guidance around when to use certain breakpoints. Such as something like "generally mobile / tablet designs start at the sm viewport". 

For example, our enterprise nav mobile design starts on the md viewport. It would improve the cohesiveness of a page if all elements with significant changes for mobile started to enter their "mobile" views at that point, instead of having some changing at one viewport and some changing at another. 

This is more for when there are bigger differences between desktop and mobile functionality. Like the nav going from expanded to collapsed or hypothetically content going from being in a table to cards.

Author: I'll mention the components for general awareness for consumers to help them design around these experiences (like the stepper and side nav)

Not all designs require redesigning at each breakpoint. Only when designs are considered complicated and/or constrained by UI elements should a designer take the time to show how they change as the viewport changes in size. 

For example, a UI featuring a table layout may not require changes for each breakpoint because the expected behavior is for the table to maintain its full width regardless of the breakpoint value. A design isn't necessary to elaborate this standard behavior.

> ![Wireframed table shown expanding in size.](/assets/foundations/breakpoints/breakpoints-table-example.png)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
![Wireframe table shown expanding in size.](/assets/foundations/breakpoints/breakpoints-table-example.png)
```

Reviewer 3: This was flagged by the linter as a misspelling

## Breakpoints

> Breakpoints are the foundational building blocks for responsive design and define the viewport widths where the page layout adjusts and/or changes for varied screen sizes and devices.

Reviewer 3: I agree with Andrew's suggestion here.

> Breakpoints are the foundational blocks to responsive design. They are defined as the viewport widths/heights where page layouts adjust for varied screen size experiences. While both horizontal and vertical breakpoints can be used in responsive design, the standardization of these values will only be focused on the widths. 

Reviewer 3: I would remove this final sentence also:
"While both horizontal and vertical breakpoints can be used in responsive design, the standardization of these values will only be focused on the widths."

Also, it seems like "viewport width" should be plural. => "viewport widths"

> These values are then used to create utilities and components to help standardize the re-adjusting of UI at different standardized screen sizes.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure if this absolutely sentence is necessary here. It seems somewhat redundant.

@jorytindall "adjustment stacking" sounds kind of awkward. Also, break points can be used to adjust designs/styles in various ways, not just in stacking layouts.

### The ranges

Helios defines five breakpoints: `sm`, `md`, `lg`, `xl`, and `xxl`.

| Name   | Value        | Application                   |
| ------ | ------------ | ----------------------------- |
| sm     | 480px        | 480 → 767                     |
| md     | 768px        | 768 → 1087                    |
| lg     | 1088px       | 1088 → 1439                   |
| xl     | 1440px       | 1440 → 1919                   |
| xxl    | 1920px       | 1920 and up                   |

> The breakpoint name refers to a range of pixel values, not just the starting value. For example, the `sm` breakpoint refers to widths between 480px and 767px. This helps simplify the language around what these ranges mean when designing, and increases the flexibility in implementation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The breakpoint name refers to a range of pixel values, not just the starting value. For example, the `sm` breakpoint refers to widths between 480px and 767px. This helps simplify the language around what these ranges mean when designing and increases the flexibility in implementation.
```

### Working with custom values

> The ranges provided are to create a cohesive *starting* experience. Although, in some rare circumstances a custom value may be needed to accomodate for specific use-cases that these values do not cover. For example: a team has learned that users with 2500px viewports started using a specific product, and require a nuanced approach in displaying the UI at that screen size. In cases like this, a value may be added on top of the established values to provide additional nuance to that experience.

Author: I tweaked it a bit, but this is better, thank you :)

!!! info

If a custom value already exists that is relatively close to an established breakpoint, it is recommended that it be migrated to the nearest standard breakpoint. This creates a consistent and predictable experience for the user as they work within (and across) the HashiCorp product suite.

!!!

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 3: Nit: Delete extra blank line (so that there's only one blank line vs. 2 in a row).

> If a custom value already exists that is relatively close to an established range, it is recommended that it be migrated to the nearest standard breakpoint. This way, experiences become consistent and predictable for the user as they work within (and across) the HashiCorp product suite.

Author: Breakpoint is better, agreed.

## Designing with purpose

> Not all designs require redesigning at each of these breakpoints. Only when designs are considered complicated and/or constrained by UI placement should a designer take the time to show how they change as the viewport decreases in size. 

Reviewer 3: Maybe change "decreases in size" to "changes in size".

> An example of this would be that a table-centered experience may not require additional UI adjustment at the `lg`, `xl`, and `xxl` breakpoints. The expectated beahvior for the table is to maintain its full width regardless of the breakpoint value, and that a design isn't required to elaborate this standard behavior.

Reviewer 3: I'd change this to something more like the below. ("adherence" isn't the right word to use here.)

"a table may not require adherence to each breakpoint"
=>
"a table layout may not require changes for each breakpoint"

> An example of this would be that a table-centered experience may not require additional UI adjustment at the `lg`, `xl`, and `xxl` breakpoints. The expectated beahvior for the table is to maintain its full width regardless of the breakpoint value, and that a design isn't required to elaborate this standard behavior.

Reviewer 4: Yeah, that's a good suggestion, more plain language

![Wireframed table shown expanding in size.](/assets/foundations/breakpoints/breakpoints-table-example.png)

> An example of a UI changing over varied screen sizes would be a landing page where cards are aligned and styled in an asymetric manner. As the screen size decreases, the cards not only shift, but the content within them does as well. This would be considered a complicated UI that requires more naunced designing at all breakpoints. In a scenario like this, designers would be expected to elaborate how this experience is adjusted in the `sm`, `md` and `lg` (if not more) screens.

Reviewer 3: Btw, I think it may be more useful/accurate to speak in terms of "views" vs. "breakpoints" everywhere.

Breakpoints are used to define "views". (For example, "sm", "md", "lg" ect. views as we are calling them but they could also be named "mobile", "tablet", etc. views if that helps in thinking about it.)

> An example of a UI changing over varied screen sizes would be a landing page where cards are aligned and styled in an asymetric manner. As the screen size decreases, the cards not only shift, but the content within them does as well. This would be considered a complicated UI that requires more naunced designing at all breakpoints. In a scenario like this, designers would be expected to elaborate how this experience is adjusted in the `sm`, `md` and `lg` (if not more) screens.

Author: I adjusted to try to match what you're talking about Kristin, good suggestion.

Not all designs require redesigning at each breakpoint. Only when designs are considered complicated and/or constrained by UI elements should a designer take the time to show how they change as the viewport changes in size.

For example, a UI featuring a table layout may not require changes for each breakpoint because the expected behavior is for the table to maintain its full width regardless of the breakpoint value. A design isn't necessary to elaborate this standard behavior.

![Wireframe table shown expanding in size.](/assets/foundations/breakpoints/breakpoints-table-example.png)

Redesigning across multiple breakpoints is often necessary for complex UIs, such as a landing page with cards arranged in a grid. As the viewport size decreases, both the position and content of the cards change, requiring nuanced designs across breakpoints. In such scenarios, designers should specify how the layout adjusts at the `sm`, `md`, and `lg` views.

![Diagram depicting "large", "medium", and "small" screen sizes displaying a varying number of columns in rows of content blocks.](/assets/foundations/breakpoints/breakpoints-card-designs-shfting.png)

### Responsiveness in Helios

> Helios has responsive behavior built into some components. These components include, but are not limited to, [SideNav](/components/side-nav) (lg), [Stepper Nav](/components/stepper/nav) (md) and [Pagination](/components/stepper/pagination) (lg). Knowing these details helps designers incorporate these behaviors seemlessly into their designs and creates cohesion between the system and product experiences.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Responsive behavior is already built into some Helios components. These components include, but are not limited to, [SideNav](/components/side-nav) (lg), [Stepper Nav](/components/stepper/nav) (md) and [Pagination](/components/stepper/pagination) (lg).
```

Reviewer 3: The last sentence didn't seem necessary to me.

## Breakpoints

Breakpoints define specific viewport widths where the layout adjusts to support responsive experiences across screen sizes and devices.

> These values are then used to create utilities and helper components to standardize changes of the UI at different viewport sizes.

Author: Good recommendation!

> ## Breakpoints

Reviewer 4: I'd advocate for removing this headline altogether and raising the subsequent headlines up to an H2.

Breakpoints define specific viewport widths where the layout adjusts to support responsive experiences across screen sizes and devices. These values are then used to create utilities and helper components to standardize changes of the UI at different viewport sizes.

### The ranges

> Helios defines five breakpoints: `sm`, `md`, `lg`, `xl`, and `xxl`.

Reviewer: In the second suggestion there is a typo?

> Helios defines five breakpoints: `sm`, `md`, `lg`, `xl`, and `xxl`.

Reviewer 5: Thanks for catching that — updated!

| Name   | Value        | Application                   |
| ------ | ------------ | ----------------------------- |
| sm     | 480px        | 480 → 767                     |
| md     | 768px        | 768 → 1087                    |
| lg     | 1088px       | 1088 → 1439                   |
| xl     | 1440px       | 1440 → 1919                   |
| xxl    | 1920px       | 1920 and up                   |

The breakpoint name refers to a range of pixel values, not just the starting value. For example, the `sm` breakpoint refers to widths between 480px and 767px. This helps simplify the language around what these ranges mean when designing and increases the flexibility in implementation.

> _Note: the range 0-479px is intentionally left without a name: from a design perspective, we don't expect designers to produce mockups for such small screen sizes; from a development perspective, in a mobile-first approach that range can be covered using default styles (overwritten via media queries for subsequent ranges)._

Reviewer 2: [Suggestion] I don't think it is accurate to say we don't expect designers to design mockups less than 479px. Most of the mobile frames in Figma are less than 480px. Our wireframes mobile views are at 390px. I would say we can probably remove this note. It may add more confusion around what sizes people should be creating mockups at for mobile.

Reviewer: @majedelass @LilithJames-HDS thoughts? when we discussed this, [we agreed that designers should design at this viewport](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1gG-c9xUul3mwHvGUq7Z2NIWiM_-artjnjNCdGdrtLmI/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.en743se5snt1) (480px). Should we review this decision?

Reviewer: > Most of the mobile frames in Figma are less than 480px

@dchyun sure, but because they're general purpose (and for mobile-app too). In our specific case, our applications are mainly (predominantly) [desktop-oriented](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1gG-c9xUul3mwHvGUq7Z2NIWiM_-artjnjNCdGdrtLmI/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.hajyz1yaxat8), so having to design below that size becomes a bit of a futile exercise (that's [the conclusion we've reached](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1gG-c9xUul3mwHvGUq7Z2NIWiM_-artjnjNCdGdrtLmI/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.en743se5snt1)).

> Our wireframes mobile views are at 390px

@majedelass @LilithJames-HDS something to review/reconsider with @andgen404 ?

Author: Right now, no one designs for the mobile experience (at least not generally speaking), and so keeping it at 480px is fine. A couple of reasons why we chose 480: 
- Cloud UI uses this value as their "smallest" meaning that HCP values this number over, say 390 or even 320. This also means that adopting this value, and encouraging designers to start from here will create consistency across products from a standardization perspective.
- We are a "desktop first" company, even though we're trying to shift away from this thinking, it's our reality, meaning that smaller screens are less likely to be used for our products (390 is still pretty small).

If for some reason a product believes that anything other than 480 is needed (say 390 in addition to 480), nothing is stopping them from creating a custom value.

Lilith, would like to hear your thoughts if you have anything else to add too.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for linking that decision in the memo. I missed that earlier. 
> Our wireframes mobile views are at 390px

I only referenced the Figma frames to show that _mostly_ the generic mobile views that the prototypes are built around are less than 480. 

My one design thought here is it's easier to design for the narrowest possible width than to design for a wider mobile width and have to worry what will happen when things shrink. I don't think what our prototypes are made at has to line up exactly with where our breakpoints are for every instance. Maybe for mobile it would be more helpful to design at a width below our breakpoint.

But that all said I totally get the "desktop first" idea, and I'm happy with whatever decision design lands on. Just wanted to see what our guidance was.

Reviewer 5: I agree with the use of 480px. We have chatted about it and because of the nature and complexity of our products, we don't really expect end users to be working on tiny screens (if we did, we would likely have an app rather than just shoving everything into the smallest mobile experience). 480 gives designers enough visual real estate to imply how content wraps without losing the hierarchy

> _Note: the range 0-479px is intentionally left without a name: from a design perspective, we don't expect designers to produce mockups for such small screen sizes; from a development perspective, in a mobile-first approach that range can be covered using default styles (overwritten via media queries for subsequent ranges)._

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
_Note: the range 0-479px is intentionally left without a name. We don't anticipate designers needing to produce mockups for screen sizes below this width and from the audits conducted, Cloud UI has set a standard of 480px for the most narrow design. From a development perspective, in a mobile-first approach the range below 480px can be covered using default styles (overwritten via media queries for subsequent ranges).
_
```

Author: Formatting is slightly off for the italics, so I updated it. Thanks for this suggestion.

### Custom values

> The provided breakpoints serve as a cohesive _starting_ point for design, which is why templates have been provided in our [Patterns library](https://www.figma.com/design/5Pv32j4QiOOD8lkFTD1dxC/HDS-Patterns-v2.0?m=auto&node-id=71-11371&t=OvSfKLEJhHntQQZA-1) for this purpose. However, custom values may be necessary for specific use cases that these breakpoints do not cover. For example, if a team discovers that users with 2500px viewports are using a product, a nuanced approach to the UI at that screen size may be required. In such cases, an additional value can be added to enhance the user experience.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The provided breakpoints serve as a cohesive _starting_ point for design. Templates have been provided in our [Patterns library](https://www.figma.com/design/5Pv32j4QiOOD8lkFTD1dxC/HDS-Patterns-v2.0?m=auto&node-id=71-11371&t=OvSfKLEJhHntQQZA-1) for this purpose. However, custom values may be necessary for specific use cases that these breakpoints do not cover. For example, if a team discovers that users with 2500px viewports are using a product, a nuanced approach to the UI at that screen size may be required. In such cases, a custom value may be added to enhance the user experience.
```

Reviewer: "a custom value may be added" - as a designer, how do I "add" a custom value, in Figma? so maybe we could say something around "In such cases, a custom width value may be used..."

Reviewer 5: That's a good note, that makes way more sense

!!! insight

If a custom value already exists that is relatively close to an established breakpoint, we recommend migrating it to the nearest standard breakpoint. This creates a consistent and predictable experience for the user as they work within (and across) the HashiCorp product suite.

!!!

## Designing with purpose

Not all designs require redesigning at each breakpoint. Only when designs are considered complicated and/or constrained by UI elements should a designer take the time to show how they change as the viewport changes in size.

For example, a UI featuring a table layout may not require changes for each breakpoint because the expected behavior is for the table to maintain its full width regardless of the breakpoint value. A design isn't necessary to elaborate this standard behavior.

> ![Wireframe table shown expanding in size.](/assets/foundations/breakpoints/breakpoints-table-example.png)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
![](/assets/foundations/breakpoints/breakpoints-table-example.png)
```

Redesigning across multiple breakpoints is often necessary for complex UIs, such as a landing page with cards arranged in a grid. As the viewport size decreases, both the position and content of the cards change, requiring nuanced designs across breakpoints. In such scenarios, designers should specify how the layout adjusts at the `sm`, `md`, and `lg` views.

![Diagram depicting "large", "medium", and "small" screen sizes displaying a varying number of columns in rows of content blocks.](/assets/foundations/breakpoints/breakpoints-card-designs-shfting.png)

> ### Responsiveness in Helios

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Responsiveness in Helios
```
[Nit] This heading should probably be brought up one level

Responsive behavior is already built into some Helios components. These components include, but are not limited to:

> * [SideNav](/components/side-nav) (width collapses below lg breakpoint)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [App Side Nav](/components/app-side-nav) (width collapses below lg breakpoint)
```
[Suggestion] Should be updated to the new side nav component

* [Stepper Nav](/components/stepper/nav) (layout shifts below sm breakpoint)

> * [Pagination](/components/stepper/pagination) (layout stacks below lg breakpoint)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [Pagination](/components/pagination) (layout stacks below lg breakpoint)
```
[Issue] Broken link
